# Enhancement Three - Databases
The artifact I selected for this enhancement is the same contact management system from the other enhancements. I originally created this program in CS320, but it was very basic at the time and only worked through unit tests. After the previous two enhancements it now has a proper command line interface and efficient search and sort functionality. For this third enhancement, I planned to build off of those previous updates and implement a database so that it can have persistent storage instead of resetting the data every application run.

I selected this artifact for the databases enhancement because adding a database would be the obvious next step for this program and it would allow me to showcase how a database can vastly improve the usability and scalability of a system. Since I used this artifact in the previous enhancements, the code is already well documented and modular, so my additions are not going to be out of place and have a good foundation so I can focus on a strong database implementation. I believe the specific components that showcase my skills and abilities in software development are the separation of concerns between the user interface, service layer, and storage layer that I just added. Clean code is integral for continued development plans so you can make updates in the future without having to rewrite everything. My storage layer ContactStorage.java uses JDBC and a SQLite database which executes SQL queries for all the CRUD operations now. For example, adding a contact is handled through an INSERT statement using a prepared statement, while search operations use SELECT queries with WHERE clauses to filter results based on user input. I was able to redesign search functionality by using these queries instead of the iterative loops in the previous enhancement. I also implemented prepared statements to ensure safe and efficient interactions between the user and the database so that way no unintended inputs can break the system. These updates demonstrate strong principles such as modularity, scalability, and maintainability. The artifact was improved greatly in several areas such as its performance, security, and useability because of this enhancement.

I strongly believe that I have met all course outcomes in this enhancement. I demonstrated my ability to design and evaluate computing solutions by switching over to database queries to optimize performance and managing the trade-offs associated with that. I also applied well-founded techniques by using SQLite and JDBC into the application. It made the most sense for the contact management system compared to other storage solutions. I also showcased my security mindset by anticipating possible vulnerabilities such as SQL injections and improper use by using prepared statements and validating user input. Even though the application is simple, it’s still important for it to be secure and having that mindset throughout development is integral for success.

Overall, this was a successful enhancement, and I was able to learn a lot while making my modifications. I learned how to refactor one storage solution into another and dive deeper into different ways to make a database that works for the needs of the application. I already have some experience writing SQL queries, but I haven’t spent too much time working with prepared statements and now I feel strongly about creating a secure application using those. I faced some challenges getting the SQLite database setup because I had to work with the JDBC library and had to use some documentation to troubleshoot some errors I was getting. In the past, I’ve mostly used C# and .NET when working with APIs and Databases, so using Java was challenging but a good learning experience. In order to verify that the database integration was working correctly, I tested the application by adding, retrieving, updating, and deleting contacts through the CLI and then confirming that the data persisted between application runs. This enhancement strengthens my portfolio by demonstrating my ability to integrate databases into an existing system and prepares me for future roles that work on full stack applications with data-driven development.

---

[<< Back to Artifact](artifact.md)

[<< Back to Homepage](README.md)
